Content:


























Ethics vs. Morals: What's the Difference?






































































































 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 








Skip to content


















 
Menu






















 
Search








 














Search






 




GO










 




 More in Theories

 









Behavioral Psychology








Cognitive Psychology








Developmental Psychology








Personality Psychology








Social Psychology








Biological Psychology








Psychosocial Psychology







 View More









 








 Conditions A-Z

 




Addiction


Depression


ADHD


Anxiety


Bipolar Disorder


PTSD




 View All





 










 Therapy

 




Therapy Center


When To See a Therapist


Types of Therapy


Best Online Therapy


Best Couples Therapy




 View All





 










 Living Well

 




Managing Stress


Meditation


Sleep and Dreaming


Understanding Emotions


Self-Improvement




 View All





 










 Relationships

 




Healthy Relationships


Dating


Intimacy




 View All





 










 Psychology

 




Theories


Student Resources


Personality Types




 View All





 










 Trending

 




Quizzes


Guided Meditations


Verywell Mind Insights


2024 Verywell Mind 25


Mental Health in the Classroom




 View All





 








 About Us



 Editorial Process



 Review Board



 Crisis Support



Verywell Mind's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment.


Ⓒ 2025 Dotdash Media, Inc. — All rights reserved


 




Ad














 


Theories






 The Difference Between Morals and Ethics



Understanding the key differences between these related terms




By


 
Brittany Loggins


 














 




Brittany Loggins


 


Brittany is a health and lifestyle writer and former staffer at TODAY on NBC and CBS News. She's also contributed to dozens of magazines.








Learn about our 


editorial process








Updated on February 07, 2025








 
Reviewed


Verywell Mind articles are reviewed by mental health professionals. Reviewers confirm the content is thorough and accurate, reflecting the latest evidence-based research. Content is reviewed before publication and upon substantial updates. 
Learn more
.
 by



 
Steven Gans, MD


 














 








Reviewed by


Steven Gans, MD


 


Steven Gans, MD is board-certified in psychiatry and is an active supervisor, teacher, and mentor at Massachusetts General Hospital.








Learn about our 


Review Board












 












 


 
Stockarm / Getty Images




Table of Contents


View All














Table of Contents








What Is Morality?


What Are Ethics?


What's the Difference Between Ethics and Morals?


Ethics, Morals, and Mental Health


Are Ethics and Morals Relative?


Discovering Your Own Ethics and Morals


 Ethics represent the beliefs of your external community, while your morals are your personal, internal sense of right and wrong.
 That's not to say there isn't a lot of overlap, and, in many cases, the ethical beliefs of your community influence your sense of morality.





 We often use the terms "ethics" and "morals" to refer to how we tell the difference between "right" and "wrong" or "good" and "bad." But are ethics vs. morals really just the same thing? It's not uncommon to hear morality and ethics referenced in the same sentence.





 While many use the two terms interchangeably, they are actually two different things. While they definitely have a lot of commonalities (not to mention very similar definitions!), there are some distinct differences.






 
 What Is Morality? 
 


 Morality is a person or society's idea of what is right or wrong, especially in regard to a person's behavior.






 Maintaining this type of behavior allows people to live successfully in groups and society. That said, they require a personal adherence to the commitment of the greater good.





 
Morals
 have changed over time and based on location. For example, different countries can have different standards of morality. That said, researchers have determined that seven morals seem to transcend across the globe and across time:








Bravery:
 Bravery has historically helped people determine hierarchies. People who demonstrate the ability to be brave in tough situations have historically been seen as leaders.


Fairness:
 Think of terms like "meet in the middle" and the concept of taking turns.


Defer to authority:
 Deferring to authority is important because it signifies that people will adhere to rules that attend to the greater good. This is necessary for a functioning society.


Helping the group: 
Traditions exist to help us feel closer to our group. This way, you feel more supported, and a general sense of altruism is promoted.


Loving your family:
 This is a more focused version of helping your group. It's the idea that loving and supporting your family allows you to raise people who will continue to uphold moral norms.


Returning favors
: This goes for society as a whole and specifies that people may avoid behaviors that aren't generally 
altruistic
.


Respecting others’ property: 
This goes back to settling disputes based on prior possession, which also ties in the idea of fairness.






 Many of these seven morals require deferring short-term interests for the sake of the larger group. People who act purely out of self-interest can often be regarded as immoral or selfish.





Researchers have also explored how individual morality develops. 
Kohlberg's theory of moral development
, for example, suggests that kids develop morals through a series of progressive stages.


What Is Objective Morality?




 
 What Are Ethics? 
 


 Many scholars and researchers don't differentiate between morals and ethics, and that's because they're very similar. Many definitions even explain ethics as a set of moral principles.





 The big difference when it comes to ethics is that it refers to community values more than personal values. Dictionary.com defines the term as a system of values that are "moral" as determined by a community.






In general, morals are guidelines that affect individuals, while ethics are guideposts for entire larger groups or communities. Ethics are also more culturally based than morals.


 For example, the seven 
types of morals
 listed earlier transcend cultures, but there are certain rules, especially those in predominantly religious nations, that are determined by cultures that are not recognized around the world.





 It's also common to hear the word ethics in 
medical communities
 or as the guidepost for other professions that impact larger groups.





 For example, the Hippocratic Oath in medicine is an example of a largely accepted ethical practice. 
The American Medical Association even outlines
 nine distinct principles that are specified in medical settings. These include putting the patient's care above all else and promoting good health within communities.





 
 What's the Difference Between Ethics and Morals? 
 


 Morals refer to a sense of right or wrong. Ethics, on the other hand, refer more to principles of "good" versus "evil" that are generally agreed upon by a community. 





 What are some examples of morals and ethics? Morals can include not lying, being generous, being patient, and being loyal. Ethics can include the ideals of honesty, integrity, respect, and 
loyalty
.






 


Ethics




Rules of conduct


Stem from society or profession


Can vary based on context


External guidelines








Morals




Personal principles


Arise from individual beliefs


Tend to me more fixed across situations


Internal values










 
 Ethics, Morals, and Mental Health 
 


 Since morality and ethics can impact individuals and differ from community to community, research has aimed to integrate ethical principles into the practice of 
psychiatry
.






 That said, many people grow up adhering to a certain moral or ethical code within their families or communities. When your morals change over time, you might feel a sense of 
guilt
 and 
shame
.






For example, many older people still believe that living with a significant other before marriage is immoral. This belief is dated and mostly unrecognized by younger generations, who often see living together as an important and even necessary step in a relationship that helps them make decisions about the future. Additionally, in many cities, living costs are too high for some people to live alone.


 However, even if younger person understands that it's not wrong to live with their partner before marriage they might still feel guilty for doing so, especially if they were taught that doing so was immoral.





When dealing with guilt or shame, it's important to assess these feelings with a therapist or someone else that you trust.


 
 Are Ethics and Morals Relative? 
 


 Morality is certainly relative since it is determined individually from person to person. What one person believes is "right" or "wrong" might look very different for someone else. Such moral beliefs are heavily influenced by factors like family values, personal experiences, and religious teachings, all things that gradually shape our perspectives over time. We each have our own unique moral compass that might guide us in a slightly different direction based on the many paths we've walked so far.





 Ethics, on the other hand, are the shared rules of our communities or cultures. They aren't just a static code that applies to every one person in every situation, however. Instead, they are often specific to the context.





 For example, the ethical guidelines for the medical community (think patient confidentiality and do no harm) are absolutely crucial in those spaces. However, they don't really apply to the people outside of that community. That said, these ethics are still important since they uphold 
trust
 and promote caring for the community as a whole.





Can a person be moral but not ethical?


Because morals involve a personal code of conduct, it is possible for people to be moral but not ethical. A person can follow their personal moral code without adhering to a more community-based sense of ethical standards. In some cases, a person's individual morals may be at odds with society's ethics.


 
 Discovering Your Own Ethics and Morals 
 


 This is important for young adults trying to figure out what values they want to carry into their own lives and future families. This can also determine how well young people create and stick to 
boundaries in their personal relationships
.





 Part of determining your individual moral code will involve overcoming feelings of guilt because it may differ from your upbringing. This doesn't mean that you're disrespecting your family, but rather that you're evolving.





 
Working with a therapist
 can help you better understand the moral code you want to adhere to and how it ties in aspects of your past and present understanding of the world.





 
 Takeaways 
 


 Understanding the difference between ethics vs. morals isn't always cut and dry. And it's OK if your moral and ethical codes don't directly align with the things you learned as a child. Part of growing up and finding 
autonomy
 in life involves learning to think for yourself. You determine what you will and will not allow in your life, and what boundaries are acceptable for you in your relationships.





 That said, don't feel bad if your ideas of right and wrong change over time. This is a good thing! It shows that you are willing to learn and understand those with differing ideas and opinions.





 Working with a therapist could prove beneficial as you sort out what you do and find acceptable parts of your personal moral code.



5 Sources














Verywell Mind uses only high-quality sources, including peer-reviewed studies, to support the facts within our articles. Read our 
editorial process
 to learn more about how we fact-check and keep our content accurate, reliable, and trustworthy.


 


Chaddha R, Agrawal G. 
Ethics and morality
. 
Indian J Orthop
. 2023;57(11):1707-1713. doi:10.1007/s43465-023-01004-3


Dictionary.com. 
Morality
.


Curry OS, Mullins DA, Whitehouse H. 
Is it good to cooperate? Testing the theory of morality-as-cooperation in 60 societies
. Current Anthropology. 2019;60(1):47-69. doi:10.1086/701478


Dictionary.com. 
Ethics
.


Crowden A. 
Ethically Sensitive Mental Health Care: Is there a Need for a Unique Ethics for Psychiatry?
 
Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry
. 2003;37(2):143-149.






















By 
Brittany Loggins



Brittany is a health and lifestyle writer and former staffer at TODAY on NBC and CBS News. She's also contributed to dozens of magazines.





 








See Our Editorial Process








Meet Our Review Board








Share Feedback


 


 


Was this page helpful?






Thanks for your feedback!






What is your feedback?


 Helpful



 Report an Error



 Other







 




 Submit

 
















































































Related Articles






















What Is the Somatic Nervous System?




























Signs and Types of Paraphilic Disorders


































Are High IQ People More Successful?




























The Color Psychology of Black


































Can Your DNA Cause Narcissism?




























What Happens When You Have an Out-of-Body Experience?




























What Is the Proximity Principle in Psychology?




























How Does Reverse Psychology Work?




























What to Know About the Choleric Temperament 




























How the Stress-Vulnerability Model Impacts Your Mental Health




























How the Unconscious Mind Influences Your Everyday Decisions




























Don't Fall for the Sunk Cost Fallacy: Tips for Smarter Life Decisions








 














 




Daily Tips for a Healthy Mind to Your Inbox










Sign Up




You're in!


Thank you, {{form.email}}, for signing up.


There was an error. Please try again.












Follow Us






 






 




 






 




 






 




 






 






Conditions A-Z


Therapy


Living Well


Relationships


Psychology


Trending


 
Meet Our Review Board


About Us


Editorial Process


Privacy Policy


In the News


Advertise


Terms of Service


Careers


Contact


Your Privacy Choices
 










Crisis Support


Verywell Mind's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment.




Ⓒ 2025 Dotdash Media, Inc. — All rights reserved
 


 











Verywell Mind
is part of the 
Dotdash Meredith
 publishing family.









































By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. 
Cookies Settings
 
Accept All Cookies




