



How to Be a Better Person to Others and Yourself




Healthline
Health Conditions
Health Conditions
All
Breast Cancer
Cancer Care
Caregiving for Alzheimer's Disease
Chronic Kidney Disease
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
Digestive Health
Eye Health
Heart Health
Menopause
Mental Health
Migraine
Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
Psoriasis
Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)
Sleep Health
Type 2 Diabetes
Weight Management
Condition Spotlight
All
Controlling Ulcerative Colitis
Navigating Life with Bipolar Disorder
Mastering Geographic Atrophy
Managing Type 2 Diabetes
Wellness
Wellness Topics
All
CBD
Fitness
Hearing
Mental Well-Being
Nutrition
Parenthood
Recipes
Sexual Health
Skin Care
Sleep Health
Vitamins and Supplements
Women's Wellness
Product Reviews
All
At-Home Testing
Men's Health
Mental Health
Nutrition
Sleep
Vitamins and Supplements
Women's Health
Featured Programs
All
Your Guide to Glucose Health
Inflammation and Aging
Cold & Flu Season Survival Guide
She’s Good for Real
Tools
Featured
Video Series
Pill Identifier
FindCare
Drugs A-Z
Lessons
All
Crohn’s and Ulcerative Colitis Essentials
Diabetes Nutrition
High Cholesterol
Taming Inflammation in Psoriasis
Taming Inflammation in Psoriatic Arthritis
Newsletters
All
Anxiety and Depression
Digestive Health
Heart Health
Migraine
Nutrition Edition
Type 2 Diabetes
Wellness Wire
Lifestyle Quizzes
Find a Diet
Find Healthy Snacks
Weight Management
How Well Do You Sleep?
Are You a Workaholic?
Featured
Health News
All
Can 6-6-6 Walking Workout Help You Lose Weight?
This Couple Lost 118 Pounds Together Without Medication
5 Science-Backed Ways to Live a Longer Life
Morning Coffee May Help You Live Longer
‘Weekend Warrior’ Workouts for Your 2025 Fitness Goals
This Just In
5 Tips for a Healthy Lifestyle
How to Disinfect Your House After the Flu
Best Vegan and Plant-Based Meal Delivery for 2025
Does Medicare Cover Pneumonia Shots?
Chromosomes, Genetics, and Your Health
Top Reads
Best Multivitamins for Women
Best Multivitamins for Men
Best Online Therapy Services
Online Therapy That Takes Insurance
Buy Ozempic Online
Mounjaro Overview
Video Series
Youth in Focus
Healthy Harvest
Through an Artist's Eye
Future of Health
Connect
Find Your Bezzy Community
Bezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app.
All
Breast Cancer
Multiple Sclerosis
Depression
Migraine
Type 2 Diabetes
Psoriasis
Follow us on social media
Can't get enough? Connect with us for all things health.
Subscribe
How to Become a Better Person in 12 Steps
Medically reviewed
 by 
Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyD
 — 
Written by 
Cindy Lamothe
 
 on April 24, 2019
Gratitude
Greeting others
Digital detox
Self-talk
Kindness
Mindful eating
Sleep
Deep breathing
Tidying
Forgiveness
Self-care
Self-love
Takeaway
Changing your behavior can be a difficult process, but just like physical exercise, all it takes is practice. 
It’s normal to feel like you could be doing more when it comes to self-improvement. But being a better person doesn’t involve being overly hard on yourself. In fact, it’s quite the opposite. 
The more self-kindness and self-compassion you can foster, the more equipped you’ll be to treat those around you the same way. Plus, doing good for others can give your life a deeper sense of meaning. It may even help to improve your physical and mental health. 
Here’s a look at some ways to build self-improvement into your daily routine and let go of negative thoughts about yourself. 
1. Cultivate gratitude
You’ve probably heard it a million times, but keeping a gratitude journal of what you’re thankful for can have a big effect on your mindset. 
Research
 has shown that incorporating gratitude into your daily life can help ward off 
stress
, improve sleep, and cultivate more positive social relationships.
Anna Hennings
, MA, a mental performance coach in sport psychology, recommends using the acronym GIFT to help you identify what you’re grateful for. 
gift technique
When thinking about things you’re grateful for, look for instances of:
G
rowth: personal growth, like learning a new skill
I
nspiration: moments or things that inspired you
F
riends/family: people who enrich your life 
T
ranquility: the small, in-between moments, such as enjoying a cup of coffee or a good book
S
urprise: the unexpected or a nice favor
When listing things you’re grateful for, notes Hennings, make sure to also note why that thing makes you grateful. 
2. Greet everyone you meet
Whether you nod or smile to strangers passing by or say “good morning” to everyone who enters the office, make an effort to acknowledge those around you when you see them, says psychologist 
Madeleine Mason Roantree
. 
In doing so, you’ll notice might find yourself feeling more present and connected to those around you, even if you don’t have a close relationship with them. 
3. Try a digital detox
Unplugging for even a small amount of time can be beneficial to your well-being. The next time you find yourself with nothing to do, step away from your phone for a few hours.
Instead, try going for a walk and connecting with your thoughts. 
Step away from your phone
 either for a few hours or even take the entire day off of devices. Instead, try getting outside and connecting with nature, or meeting up with friends IRL. Remember: Even a short break from your phone can help you unwind and focus on what brings you joy.
4. Use positive self-talk
It’s easy to get caught up in being overly harsh and critical of your perceived failings. This negative, unproductive self-talk can lower our overall motivation, explains Hennings.
If you’re constantly telling yourself you aren’t a good person, for example, it’s hard to find motivation to take steps toward self-improvement. 
Practice 
positive 
self-talk
 by stating a fact and following up with some optimism.
facts + optimism = positivity
The next time you find yourself feeling incompetent or overwhelmed, try telling yourself:
“I know this change is going to be challenging, but I’ve put a lot of meaningful thought into it and have considered all the options open to me [
fact
], so I feel confident I am doing the best I can in this moment [
optimism
].”
The hard part is catching yourself in the act of negative thinking and intentionally deciding to think differently. But with a bit of practice, this will get easier. 
5. Practice random acts of kindness
Being kind to others can help give you a sense of purpose and make you feel less isolated. 
Try doing something nice for someone at random:
Pay a compliment to a stranger.
Buy lunch for your colleague.
Send a card to a friend.
Make a donation to someone in need.
“You’ll notice your mood lift a little when you do good for the sheer joy of it,” says Roantree. 
Studies
 show that simply counting acts of kindness for one week can boost happiness and gratitude.
6. Eat at least one meal mindfully
When you’re caught up in the middle of a hectic day, it’s tempting to rush through your meal without listening to your body.
Mindful eating gives you a chance to check in with both your physical feelings and your emotions. 
Pick a meal, even if it’s just a sandwich, and take your time eating it. Notice the different tastes and textures. “It’s a type of mini meditation that can act as a simple ‘de-stressor,’” says Roantree.
Not sure where to start? 
Our guide to mindful eating can help.
7. Get enough sleep
Not feeling fully rested can make you feel grumpy and unproductive throughout the day. Try to get 
seven to eight hours
 of sleep each night.
Find ways to improve the quality of your sleep by reducing your caffeine consumption late in the day, taking a melatonin supplement, or relaxing in a warm bath or shower before bedtime. 
Check out these other tips for getting a better night’s rest.
8. Breathe consciously
Take a moment at the bus stop, in line at the grocery store, or before nodding off to sleep to focus on your breathing. Practicing even a few minutes a day of 
deep breathing
 has been shown to jumpstart our body’s relaxation response and regulate stress.
deep breathing 101
Roantree suggests trying the following technique: 
Inhale as you normally would.
Exhale, making sure you take longer than you did to inhale. 
Repeat this process until you start to feel relaxed. If you prefer to count, try breathing in for the count of 4, holding for the count of 7, and exhaling for the count of 8. 
9. Clean for 30 minutes
The way you feel about your home can influence whether your time there is restorative or stressful. 
The next time you have a spare 30 minutes, set a timer and tackle some quick household chores that’ll add a little brightness to your day, such as:
cleaning your bathroom mirror
hanging that picture you love but haven’t gotten around to displaying
clearing off your desk
Reward yourself by taking some time to enjoy your refreshed space — do a face mask in your newly clean bathroom, for example. 
10. Forgive yourself and others
Holding on to regret, pain, and resentment hurts others. But it also hurts you. When you feel any of these emotions, it affects your mood and how you treat everyone, including yourself. 
“Harboring unforgiveness breads negative thoughts,” says 
Catherine Jackson
, a licensed clinical psychologist and neurotherapist. “Decide to let it go and make a plan to never go to bed angry.”
Check out our tips for letting go of the past.
11. Engage in self-care
We often think of 
self-care
 as manicures and spa treatments (which are all great ways to destress). But according to Jackson, daily self-care goes way beyond pampering. “It’s also about eating well and getting enough nutrition to support your brain and body,” she explains. 
Similarly, make sure you’re exercising or mindfully moving your body, taking time to connect with others, and having some relaxation or down time for yourself.
These don’t need to be time-consuming endeavors. Look for quick 10- or 20-minute pockets of time in your day where you can head outside for a walk or prepare yourself a bowl of fresh fruit. 
12. Be kind to yourself
Many of us have the habit of lingering on something that was said to us, replaying it often in our minds. Instead of taking things personally and being self-critical, Jackson recommends offering empathy and understanding to the other person, as well as ourselves. 
Think of all the ways you make a positive impact to those around you and try writing them down each day. Again, these don’t have to be grand gestures. 
Maybe you held the door open for someone carrying some heavy bags. Or started brewing a fresh pot of coffee at work when you noticed it was getting low.
If you find you’re still struggling to change your frame of mind, Jackson advises to think of it this way: “Tomorrow is a new day, so if you beat yourself up today about something, let yourself off the hook and start fresh tomorrow.”
be your own best friend
Try to treat yourself the same way you would a loved one. Would you constantly talk down to your best friend if they had an “off” day and dropped the ball on something? 
Hopefully not. And you shouldn’t talk to yourself that way, either. 
The bottom line
It’s normal to get caught up in trying to become the best version of yourself. But being a better person starts with treating yourself with the same loving kindness as you do others. 
This means not judging yourself harshly when your fall short of your goals and showing yourself patience and compassion on your bad days. 
Keep in mind that there are many ways to become a better person, and those offered here are just a few. Find what feels most joyous and nurturing and try to build them into your daily life. 
 
How we reviewed this article:
Sources
History
Healthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our
 
editorial policy
.
Corliss, J. (2016). Six relaxation techniques to reduce stress.
https://www.health.harvard.edu/mind-and-mood/six-relaxation-techniques-to-reduce-stress
Hennings A. (2019). Personal interview.
Otake K, et al. (2006). Happy people become happier through kindness: A counting kindnesses intervention. DOI:
https://dx.doi.org/10.1007%2Fs10902-005-3650-z">10.1007/s10902-005-3650-z
Roantree M. (2019). Personal interview.
Jackson C. (2019). Personal interview.
Wood AM, et al. (2010). Gratitude and well-being: A review and theoretical integration. DOI:
https://greatergood.berkeley.edu/pdfs/GratitudePDFs/2Wood-GratitudeWell-BeingReview.pdf
Share this article
Medically reviewed
 by 
Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyD
 — 
Written by 
Cindy Lamothe
 
 on April 24, 2019
Read this next
How to Be Happy: 12 Habits to Add to Your Routine
Happiness may feel impossible at times, but there are tips you can try to get you closer to it. We’ll show you 12 habits to help you get your mood on…
READ MORE
How Being Happy Makes You Healthier
Written by 
Daisy Coyle, APD
Research shows that being happier doesn't just make you feel better — it makes you healthier, too. This article explains how being happy makes you…
READ MORE
34 Ways to Wake Up Feeling Refreshed and Ready to Go
Medically reviewed by 
Debra Sullivan, Ph.D., MSN, R.N., CNE, COI
Tired of hitting the snooze button every morning? Here’s how to wake up refreshed and on time.
READ MORE
How to Forgive Yourself
Medically reviewed by 
Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyD
Making peace and moving forward is often easier said than done. Being able to forgive yourself requires empathy, kindness, and understanding. Whether…
READ MORE
Breathe Deeper to Improve Health and Posture
Medically reviewed by 
Judith Marcin, M.D.
Deep breathing is associated with better health, yet the busy pace of life and sedentary environments have conditioned us to only take quick, shallow…
READ MORE
How to Manage Guilt for Anxiety and Depression
You can probably recall a time when you experienced a meta-emotion, or an emotion that occurred in response to another emotion. Perhaps you teared up…
READ MORE
The No BS Guide to Organizing Your Feelings
Our feelings can affect how we handle situations and how we run our lives, so we put together a guide to help you build awareness for a more…
READ MORE
Unhappy Birthday: How I Conquered the Birthday Blues
Medically reviewed by 
Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyD
READ MORE
How Many Types of Memory Do Humans Have?
Medically reviewed by 
Heidi Moawad, M.D.
Learn more about the different types of memory mechanisms your brain uses and which is the most important.
READ MORE
What Is Episodic Memory? Characteristics and Examples
Medically reviewed by 
Heidi Moawad, M.D.
Memory can be classified in many ways, according to how long you hold the information and how you use it. Here's all about episodic memories.
READ MORE
© 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. 
See additional information
.
About Us
Contact Us
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Privacy Settings
Advertising Policy
Health Topics
Sitemap
Medical Affairs
Content Integrity
Newsletters
Your Privacy Choices
© 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. 
See additional information
.
© 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. 
See additional information
.
About
Careers
Advertise with us
OUR BRANDS
Healthline
Medical News Today
Greatist
Psych Central
Bezzy





