Content:


























Moral Principles: Types and Examples of Each






































































































 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 




 








Skip to content


















 
Menu






















 
Search








 














Search






 




GO










 




 More in Theories

 









Behavioral Psychology








Cognitive Psychology








Developmental Psychology








Personality Psychology








Social Psychology








Biological Psychology








Psychosocial Psychology







 View More









 








 Conditions A-Z

 




Addiction


Depression


ADHD


Anxiety


Bipolar Disorder


PTSD




 View All





 










 Therapy

 




Therapy Center


When To See a Therapist


Types of Therapy


Best Online Therapy


Best Couples Therapy




 View All





 










 Living Well

 




Managing Stress


Meditation


Sleep and Dreaming


Understanding Emotions


Self-Improvement




 View All





 










 Relationships

 




Healthy Relationships


Dating


Intimacy




 View All





 










 Psychology

 




Theories


Student Resources


Personality Types




 View All





 










 Trending

 




Quizzes


Guided Meditations


Verywell Mind Insights


2024 Verywell Mind 25


Mental Health in the Classroom




 View All





 








 About Us



 Editorial Process



 Review Board



 Crisis Support



Verywell Mind's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment.


Ⓒ 2025 Dotdash Media, Inc. — All rights reserved


 




Ad














 


Theories






 Types of Moral Principles and Examples of Each





By


 
Arlin Cuncic, MA


 














 




Arlin Cuncic, MA


 


Arlin Cuncic, MA, is the author of The Anxiety Workbook and founder of the website About Social Anxiety. She has a Master's degree in clinical psychology.








Learn about our 


editorial process








Updated on May 20, 2024








 
Reviewed


Verywell Mind articles are reviewed by mental health professionals. Reviewers confirm the content is thorough and accurate, reflecting the latest evidence-based research. Content is reviewed before publication and upon substantial updates. 
Learn more
.
 by



 
Steven Gans, MD


 














 








Reviewed by


Steven Gans, MD


 


Steven Gans, MD is board-certified in psychiatry and is an active supervisor, teacher, and mentor at Massachusetts General Hospital.








Learn about our 


Review Board












 












 


 
Jennifer A. Smith / Getty Images




Table of Contents


View All














Table of Contents








History


Types


Examples


Adherence


Impact


Development


Pitfalls


 Moral principles are guidelines that people live by to make sure they are doing the right thing. These include things like honesty, fairness, and equality. 
A person's morality
 or moral principles can be different from someone else's because they depend on how a person was raised and what is important to them in life.





 To better understand your moral principles or those of people in your life, it helps to know the different types of principles and examples of each. We also share their impact, how they develop, and their possible pitfalls. But first, let's look at how moral principles came about.





 
 History of Moral Principles 
 


 The history of moral principles dates back to Ancient Greece and Ancient China.
 Moral principles were important in these societies because they believed that to be successful, people needed a clear sense of right and wrong.





 Research on moral principles began with Ancient Greek philosophers like Aristotle, who wanted to figure out the meaning of virtue. Later, moral principles were studied by philosophers like John Locke, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Immanuel Kant.





 In the field of psychology, moral principles have been studied in the context of moral development. Psychologists seek to understand how children develop a sense of morality and how moral principles are applied in different contexts. For example, psychologist 
Lawrence Kohlberg studied moral development
 in boys from different cultures.





In the contemporary world, moral principles still play an important role and are considered guidelines for living life successfully. As an example, honesty is considered a moral principle because it keeps relationships strong.


What Is Objective Morality?




 
 Types of Moral Principles 
 


 There are two types of moral principles: absolute and relative.








Absolute principles
 are unchanging and universal. They are based on universal truths about the nature of human beings. For example, murder is wrong because it goes against the natural order of things. These are also sometimes called normative moral principles or those that are generally accepted by society.


Relative principles
 change depending on the situation. They are based on opinions and circumstances that may change over time, from person to person, or for different situations. Relative moral principles depend on 
a person's beliefs
, relative to what people perceive as good or bad in relation to themselves. In other words, when someone says something is good, in most cases, they are really saying it is good for them or perhaps it contributes to their well-being.






Is It Ever Okay to Lie?




 
 Morals Examples 
 


 Some examples of absolute moral principles include:







Don't kill.


Speak the truth
.


Be careful with what you say and do to others.


Respect the property of others.


Treat people in need or distress as we would want to be treated if our situation were reversed.






 Examples of relative moral principles are:







It is morally wrong to spend money on a luxury item.


It is morally right to 
care for our planet
 and preserve it for future generations.






 
 How to Adhere to Moral Principles 
 


 Many people strive to live by the moral principles they believe in. But, it can be difficult to follow them all of the time, which is what makes following one's own personal moral values even more valuable.





 There are many ways that a person might adhere to their moral principles: through thoughts and feelings, actions, or words. Below are some examples.







In thoughts and feelings, a person might strive to be honest by 
being fair and kind
.


With actions, a person might live up to their moral principles by not being violent or aggressive.


In words, someone might observe their moral principles through politeness.






 
 Impact of Moral Principles 
 


 Moral principles are important for society because they help people learn 
how to get along and live well with each other
. They teach us that all human beings deserve the same rights, which is why it's not okay to discriminate against someone based on their ethnicity or race. People who follow moral principles also tend to have a better quality of life than those who don't.






 Moral principles can also impact an individual's identity and 
sense of self-worth
.
 For example, someone who is honest may feel that they are a good person because they follow the moral principle to be truthful at all times. For people with strong values about equality, it might make them feel better about themselves when they don't discriminate against people who are different from them.





10 Types of Discrimination to Be Aware Of




 
 Tips to Develop Good Moral Principles 
 


 There are various ways to develop moral principles that transcend culture, religion, and country. If you are just starting on your moral journey, you might consider exploring morals in various philosophical texts.





 However, there are also many practical steps a person can take to develop good moral principles:







Think about what you would do when faced with an ethical dilemma and why you would make those decisions.


Ask yourself what you think is right or wrong and make sure your actions are in line with those thoughts.


Watch out for double standards
, like being nice to one person while not being so kind to another.


If it helps, write down a list of the moral principles you want to work on and post them where they're easy to see, like on a mirror or a sticky note that you hang in your workspace.


Don't worry if you're not perfectly adhering to your moral principles. The important thing is that you are trying your best.






The Difference Between Morals and Ethics




 
 Pitfalls of Moral Principles 
 


 There are some things that can go wrong when following moral principles. Below are some examples of how moral principles may not always guide you toward the best course of action.





 First, it's possible to 
make judgments about others
 based on your personal values and not theirs. For example, if you think all women should dress conservatively because you believe dressing another way is immoral, you are passing judgment on others based on your own set of standards.





 In addition, it can be hard to tell the difference between a moral principle and 
something that's cultural
 or part of your upbringing. For example, you might believe women should defer to their husbands because in your culture everyone has traditionally agreed with this idea for generations; however, if you were born into a different country where people don't think this way, you might not feel that it's morally right.





 Finally, sometimes people can use moral principles to 
justify bad behavior
 like stealing or hurting others in some way. For example, if you steal because you believe it will help the poor, your thoughts could be twisted to say that stealing is okay.





 
 Takeaways 
 


 In general, moral principles are beneficial both to society and the individual person. However, blindly following moral principles without considering their origin or using your judgment based on the situation can lead to issues.





 The best course of action is usually to adhere to a loosely defined set of moral principles that align with your beliefs and society as a whole while also considering each situation individually. Also, weigh the cost of adhering to your morals in terms of its impact on other individuals. Aim to do right by you and by others so everybody wins.



4 Sources














Verywell Mind uses only high-quality sources, including peer-reviewed studies, to support the facts within our articles. Read our 
editorial process
 to learn more about how we fact-check and keep our content accurate, reliable, and trustworthy.


 


Puett M. 
Genealogies of gods, ghosts and humans: the capriciousness of the divine in early Greece and early China
. In: 
Ancient Greece and China Compared
.


Park S. 
Cultural relativism vs. cultural absolutism
. 
Cultura
. 2021;18(2):75-91. doi:10.3726/CUL022021.0004


Austin CL, Saylor R, Finley PJ. 
Moral distress in physicians and nurses: Impact on professional quality of life and turnover
. 
Psych Trauma Theory Res Pract Policy
. 2017;9(4):399-406. doi:10.1037/tra0000201


Macko A. 
Contingencies of self-worth and the strength of deontological and utilitarian inclinations
. 
J Soc Psychol
. 2021;161(6):664-682. doi:10.1080/00224545.2020.1860882






















By 
Arlin Cuncic, MA



Arlin Cuncic, MA, is the author of The Anxiety Workbook and founder of the website About Social Anxiety. She has a Master's degree in clinical psychology.





 








See Our Editorial Process








Meet Our Review Board








Share Feedback


 


 


Was this page helpful?






Thanks for your feedback!






What is your feedback?


 Helpful



 Report an Error



 Other







 




 Submit

 
















































































Related Articles






















What Is the Proximity Principle in Psychology?




























What Is the Somatic Nervous System?


































Signs and Types of Paraphilic Disorders




























Are High IQ People More Successful?


































The Color Psychology of Black




























What to Know About the Choleric Temperament 




























How Does Reverse Psychology Work?




























Can Your DNA Cause Narcissism?




























How the Unconscious Mind Influences Your Everyday Decisions




























What Happens When You Have an Out-of-Body Experience?




























Altruism: How to Cultivate Selfless Behavior




























How the Stress-Vulnerability Model Impacts Your Mental Health








 














 




Daily Tips for a Healthy Mind to Your Inbox










Sign Up




You're in!


Thank you, {{form.email}}, for signing up.


There was an error. Please try again.












Follow Us






 






 




 






 




 






 




 






 






Conditions A-Z


Therapy


Living Well


Relationships


Psychology


Trending


 
Meet Our Review Board


About Us


Editorial Process


Privacy Policy


In the News


Advertise


Terms of Service


Careers


Contact


Your Privacy Choices
 










Crisis Support


Verywell Mind's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment.




Ⓒ 2025 Dotdash Media, Inc. — All rights reserved
 


 











Verywell Mind
is part of the 
Dotdash Meredith
 publishing family.









































By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. 
Cookies Settings
 
Accept All Cookies




