
Why we dream is still unclear, but it may help the brain process and store important memories. Frequent, vivid dreams may be related to stress, medications, sleep disorders, or early pregnancy.
While we think of sleep as a time for recharging the body, the brain is actually quite active during sleep — dreaming. Our dreams can be soothing or scary, mysterious or helpful, and realistic or fantastical.
Sometimes we wake up and have no idea that we’ve dreamed, while other times, we can closely recall our dreams because they were so intense. These are known as vivid dreams.
What causes vivid dreams?
Brain scientists aren’t sure why humans dream in the first place, but they think it has something to do with memory.
Dreaming might help the brain eliminate any unnecessary information or memories while processing and storing what’s important. Some people feel more refreshed after having slept and dreamed, even if they do not remember dreaming.
People are most likely to remember the last dream they had in their sleep cycle. But it’s possible to remember a vivid dream long after it’s occurred if it seemed very intense.
Vivid dreams can be positive or negative, realistic or fantasy. Scientists know that most heavy dreaming occurs during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. REM sleep normally cycles every 90 minutes during a night of sleep and may last 20 to 25 minutes.
About 
25%
 of an adult’s night of sleep is spent in REM cycles. The average adult should get between seven and nine hours of sleep per night for optimal health. That’s a lot of time for dreaming!
So, what causes vivid dreams? Scientists aren’t completely sure. But they think the following factors may play a part.
Stress or anxiety
Difficulties real and imagined can cause a person to experience stress and anxiety in their daily life. Problems with friends, family, school, or work can trigger intense dreams as can big events like getting married or buying a house.
Stressed caused by traumatic events, such as a 
death of a loved one
, sexual abuse, or a car accident can also cause vivid dreams. Anxiety, in particular, is associated with an increased risk of disturbing and intense nightmares.
Sleep disorders
Sleeping issues that cause a 
lack of sleep
, such as 
insomnia
 and 
narcolepsy
, can increase one’s risk of experiencing vivid dreams.
Changes to your sleep schedule, such as flying overseas (and going to sleep at a different time) or getting less sleep than usual, can also increase this risk.
Medications
There are some medications that have been reported to contribute to vivid dreams. These medications include many antidepressants, beta blockers, blood pressure medications, Parkinson’s disease drugs, and drugs to stop smoking.
Substance abuse
Using alcohol in excess, using recreational drugs, or experiencing a withdrawal from drugs can trigger vivid dreams, often nightmares.
Other health disorders
In addition to stress and anxiety, other mental health conditions, such as 
depression
 and 
schizophrenia
, are associated with vivid dreams. Physical illnesses, like 
heart disease
 and 
cancer
, have also been associated with vivid dreams.
Early pregnancy
Pregnancy can trigger changes in the body’s hormone levels, sleep patterns, and emotions. Many pregnant women say they experience vivid dreams, especially during the 
early days of their pregnancy
.
 What are the side effects of vivid dreams?
Normally, vivid dreams are nothing to worry about. Sometimes they may only affect you during a certain part of your life.
But negative vivid dreams, especially if they last for weeks or months, can be emotionally disturbing and disruptive to your sleep. And that can cause health problems.
Some common side effects of vivid dreams include:
Daytime sleepiness
. This can cause concentration and memory problems that can affect your productivity at school or work. It can even affect your ability to carry out everyday tasks, such as driving or taking a shower. Even the smallest tasks can become dangerous if you get distracted.
Mood problems
. Vivid dreams can be emotionally draining, causing depression or anxiety symptoms. This can be an especially concerning problem if your vivid dreams persist over time.
Resisting sleep
. You may find that you consciously or subconsciously avoid going to bed or falling asleep because you fear you’ll have another bad dream.
Suicidal attempts or thinking
. Some people have reported suicidal thoughts (ideation) secondary to troubling dreams. This is extremely serious. If you have attempted or are considering suicide, get help from a crisis or suicide prevention hotline. Try the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 800-273-8255. 
It’s important to get help right away.
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline: 1-800-273-8244
If you or someone you know is considering suicide, call the number above or text 
TALK
 to 
741741
 to text with a trained crisis counselor for free, 24/7. Remember, you are not alone. Treatment and support can help.
 How are vivid dreams treated?
It isn’t always possible to pinpoint an exact cause of vivid dreams. In many cases, these dreams will go away over time.
But if your vivid dreams are causing you emotional distress or physical problems, you might benefit from medical treatment or lifestyle modifications.
Schedule an appointment with your doctor or a 
sleep specialist
 to try to determine what treatments or lifestyle modifications are right for you.
Here are some of the common treatments for vivid dreams.
Medical intervention.
 If your vivid dreams are caused by an underlying mental or physical health condition, talk with a doctor about diagnosing and treating that condition. Most doctors don’t recommend use of medication to treat vivid dreams. However, in the case of nightmares induced by trauma, such as 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
, a doctor may consider prescribing sleeping medication or anti-anxiety medication to help induce sleep.
Image rehearsal therapy. 
This treatment therapy, done with a mental healthcare professional, involves changing the ending to a vivid dream or nightmare you remember when you’re awake until it no longer becomes threatening. Your mental healthcare provider will ask you to continue playing over the new, nonthreatening ending to the dream in your mind. This therapy is designed to reduce a person’s frequency of vivid dreams — especially nightmares.
Staying healthy. 
Eating well, maintaining a healthy weight, maintaining a regular sleep schedule, drinking enough water, and looking after your mental health can help prevent vivid dreams.
Coping with stress and anxiety. 
Everyone experiences stress and anxiety, but some people are better at coping with it than others. If you feel that your stress and anxiety levels are out of control, you might want to consider: 
meditation
deep breathing
relaxation techniques
art therapy
exercise
other activities that can ease your stress
Frequently asked questions about vivid dreams
Why am I suddenly dreaming so vividly?
Scientists are entirely sure what causes vivid dreams, but they believe the following factors may play a role:
stress or anxiety
sleep disorders
certain medications
early pregnancy
substance abuse
mental health conditions (such as depression or schizophrenia)
physical health disorders (such as cancer or heart disease)
Do vivid dreams mean anything?
Brain scientists do yet understand why we dream. They have discovered that if you wake up with vivid memories of your dreams, it typically means they occurred during REM sleep. REM sleep is when we tend to dream. The deepest NREM sleep is when the body fully relaxes and repairs itself. 
Learn about the stages of sleep here
.
Is it normal to have vivid dreams almost every night?
Having a vivid dream every now and then is typically not something to be concerned about. However, if you are having vivid dreams every night, you may want to talk with a doctor to see if there is an underlying condition that might be causing these dreams to occur with such regularity.
Do vivid dreams mean good sleep?
Generally speaking, dreams you remember (such as vivid dreams), usually occur during REM sleep. But a good night’s sleep typically involves getting the right balance of sleep in each sleep stage. The 
five stages of sleep
 are: light NREM sleep, deep NREM sleep, and REM sleep.
