Title: Why Do We Dream? The Role of Dreams and Nightmares
Content:




Why Do We Dream? The Role of Dreams and Nightmares




Healthline
Health Conditions
Health Conditions
All
Breast Cancer
Cancer Care
Caregiving for Alzheimer's Disease
Chronic Kidney Disease
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
Digestive Health
Eye Health
Heart Health
Menopause
Mental Health
Migraine
Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
Psoriasis
Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)
Sleep Health
Type 2 Diabetes
Weight Management
Condition Spotlight
All
Controlling Ulcerative Colitis
Navigating Life with Bipolar Disorder
Mastering Geographic Atrophy
Managing Type 2 Diabetes
Wellness
Wellness Topics
All
CBD
Fitness
Hearing
Mental Well-Being
Nutrition
Parenthood
Recipes
Sexual Health
Skin Care
Sleep Health
Vitamins and Supplements
Women's Wellness
Product Reviews
All
At-Home Testing
Men's Health
Mental Health
Nutrition
Sleep
Vitamins and Supplements
Women's Health
Featured Programs
All
Your Guide to Glucose Health
Inflammation and Aging
Cold & Flu Season Survival Guide
She’s Good for Real
Tools
Featured
Video Series
Pill Identifier
FindCare
Drugs A-Z
Lessons
All
Crohn’s and Ulcerative Colitis Essentials
Diabetes Nutrition
High Cholesterol
Taming Inflammation in Psoriasis
Taming Inflammation in Psoriatic Arthritis
Newsletters
All
Anxiety and Depression
Digestive Health
Heart Health
Migraine
Nutrition Edition
Type 2 Diabetes
Wellness Wire
Lifestyle Quizzes
Find a Diet
Find Healthy Snacks
Weight Management
How Well Do You Sleep?
Are You a Workaholic?
Featured
Health News
All
Can 6-6-6 Walking Workout Help You Lose Weight?
This Couple Lost 118 Pounds Together Without Medication
5 Science-Backed Ways to Live a Longer Life
Morning Coffee May Help You Live Longer
‘Weekend Warrior’ Workouts for Your 2025 Fitness Goals
This Just In
5 Tips for a Healthy Lifestyle
How to Disinfect Your House After the Flu
Best Vegan and Plant-Based Meal Delivery for 2025
Does Medicare Cover Pneumonia Shots?
Chromosomes, Genetics, and Your Health
Top Reads
Best Multivitamins for Women
Best Multivitamins for Men
Best Online Therapy Services
Online Therapy That Takes Insurance
Buy Ozempic Online
Mounjaro Overview
Video Series
Youth in Focus
Healthy Harvest
Through an Artist's Eye
Future of Health
Connect
Find Your Bezzy Community
Bezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app.
All
Breast Cancer
Multiple Sclerosis
Depression
Migraine
Type 2 Diabetes
Psoriasis
Follow us on social media
Can't get enough? Connect with us for all things health.
Subscribe
Why Do We Dream?
Medically reviewed
 by 
Debra Sullivan, Ph.D., MSN, R.N., CNE, COI
 — 
Written by 
James Roland
 — 
 Updated on April 13, 2023
The role of dreams
Why do we have nightmares?
What influences dreams?
How to remember your dreams
Dreams mostly occur during REM sleep when they’re harder to recall. While we know the role of sleep in regulating our health, the purpose of dreams has been tougher to explain. 
Dreams are hallucinations that occur during 
certain stages of sleep
. They’re strongest during 
REM sleep
, or the rapid eye movement stage, when you may be less likely to recall your dream. 
Much is known about the 
role of sleep
 in regulating our metabolism, blood pressure, brain function, and other aspects of health. But it’s been harder for researchers to explain the role of dreams. 
When you’re awake, your thoughts have a certain logic to them. When you sleep, your brain is still active, but your thoughts or dreams often make little or no sense. This may be because the emotional centers of the brain trigger dreams, rather than the logical regions. 
Though there’s no definitive proof, dreams are usually autobiographical thoughts based on your recent activities, conversations, or other issues in your life. However, there are some popular theories on the role of dreams. 
 The role of dreams
Researchers still don’t entirely agree on the purpose of dreams. There are, however, some widely held beliefs and theories.
Dreams as therapists
Your dreams may be ways of confronting 
emotional dramas
 in your life. And because your brain is operating at a much more emotional level than when you’re awake, your brain may make connections regarding your feelings that your conscious self wouldn’t make.
Dreams as fight-or-flight training
One of the areas of the brain that’s most active during dreaming is the amygdala. The amygdala is the part of the brain associated with the survival instinct and the fight-or-flight response. 
One theory suggests that because the amygdala is more active during sleep than in your waking life, it may be the brain’s way of getting you ready to deal with a threat. 
Fortunately, the brainstem sends out nerve signals during REM sleep that relax your muscles. That way you don’t try to run or punch in your sleep.
Dreams as your muse
One theory for why we dream is that it helps facilitate our 
creative tendencies
. Artists of all kinds credit dreams with inspiring some of their most creative work. You may have awakened at times in your life with a great idea for a movie or a song, too. 
Without the logic filter you might normally use in your waking life that can restrict your creative flow, your thoughts and ideas have no restrictions when you’re sleeping. 
Dreams as memory aides
One 
widely held theory
 about the purpose of dreams is that they help you store important memories and things you’ve learned, get rid of unimportant memories, and sort through complicated thoughts and feelings. 
Research shows
 that sleep helps store memories. If you learn new information and sleep on it, you’ll be able to recall it better than if asked to remember that information without the benefit of sleep. 
How dreams affect memory storage and recall isn’t clearly understood yet. But dreams may help the brain more efficiently store important information while blocking out stimuli that could interfere with memory and learning.
 Why do we have nightmares?
Dreams that help you deal productively with emotions, memories, and other information may seem very helpful. The occasional 
nightmare
 is considered a dream that’s simply more frightening or upsetting. Nightmares tend to be caused by stress, anxiety, or sometimes as a reaction to certain medications.
However, if you have nightmares frequently, you could have a 
sleeping disorder
. Regularly occurring scary dreams can be labeled a sleeping disorder if the nightmares: 
cause you to be anxious about going to sleep
lead to frequent disruptions of your sleep
bring about other sleeping or psychological problems 
Many people experience occasional nightmares throughout their lives. However, the American Sleep Association estimates only about 
5 percent
 of the population experiences persistent nightmares as a sleeping disorder.
 What influences dreams?
Some factors that affect us when we’re awake can also influence our dreams. 
Health conditions
One of the biggest influences on dreams is how much or how little you’re sleeping. Being 
sleep-deprived
 for a night or two (or more) can make parts of your brain much more active when you finally do slip into REM sleep. You’re likely to have more 
vivid dreams
 if you’ve had some restless nights. You’re also more likely to recall those dreams, too. 
Being pregnant is also a catalyst for vivid dreaming. Increased hormone production affects the way your brain processes thoughts and emotions. This often leads to some intense dreams.
Mental health disorders such as depression and
 anxiety
, as well as 
bipolar disorder
 and other mood-related conditions, can trigger intense and sometimes disturbing or negative dreams and nightmares. The medications for these conditions, including 
antidepressants
 and antipsychotics, are also associated with a higher risk of nightmares.
Foods
There isn’t indisputable evidence that certain foods lead to wilder or better dreams. But it’s clear that some foods may set the stage for you to remember your dreams better. 
High-carb foods, for example, can give you quick energy. But after a while, they can leave you feeling down. Anything that affects your waking mood is likely to affect your unconscious mood, too. So, if a sugar crash has you moping around during the day, those feelings could carry over into your sleep. 
Also, food that causes you to wake up throughout the night may result in you waking up more frequently in the REM stage. When that happens, you’ll probably remember more of your dreams.
Daily activities
Just as little or interrupted sleep often results in more vivid dreaming, a good night’s sleep will cut down on the intense dreams you’ll recall. 
A 
small study
 found that one good way to sleep more soundly is to exercise in the morning. A good run or other cardio workout before noon helps set your clock so that you’re more inclined to 
fall asleep faster
 and spend more time in 
deep sleep
 than if you didn’t exercise or if you exercised late at night. 
Runners and other serious fitness enthusiasts tend to spend less time in dreamy REM sleep, which is one of the lightest stages of sleep. Also, the more effectively you can de-stress during the day, the less likely you’ll be to bring stress and anxiety to bed. That should help cut down on nightmares and interrupted sleep each night.
How to remember your dreams
One of the reasons dreams can be difficult to remember is that the brain chemical associated with memory — norepinephrine — and the brain’s electrical activity that helps with recall are at their lowest levels when you’re dreaming. In fact, if you have a dream but don’t wake up during the dream, you won’t be able to remember it. The dreams you remember are the ones that are ongoing when you awaken.
Two ways to help recall your dreams is to tell yourself as you’re falling asleep that you want to remember your dream. If that’s your last thought, you may be more likely to wake up with a dream still somewhat fresh in your memory. 
Since dream recall can be easily interrupted by even the slightest distraction, you should try to remember as much of your dream as soon as you wake up. Don’t get out of bed or think about anything else. Try to grasp whatever images or memories you have of your dream and write them down on a pad next to your bed or on your smartphone.
 
How we reviewed this article:
Sources
History
Healthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our
 
editorial policy
.
Drerup M (2017). Why do we dream?
https://health.clevelandclinic.org/2017/05/how-are-dreams-related-to-your-health/
FairbrotherK, et al. (2014). Effects of exercise on timing on sleep architecture andnocturnal pressure in prehypertensives. DOI:
https://www.dovepress.com/effects-of-exercise-timing-on-sleep-architecture-and-nocturnal-blood-p-peer-reviewed-fulltext-article-VHRM
Franklin M, et al. (2005). The role of dreams inthe evolution of the human mind. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1177/147470490500300106
Nightmares – What are they and how do you treatthem. (n.d.).
https://www.sleepassociation.org/patients-general-public/nightmares/
Rasch B, et al. (2013). About sleep’s role inmemory. DOI:
https://dx.doi.org/10.1152%2Fphysrev.00032.2012
Siclari F, et al. (2017). The neural correlatesof dreaming. DOI:
http://www.nature.com/neuro/journal/v20/n6/full/nn.4545.html
Share this article
Medically reviewed
 by 
Debra Sullivan, Ph.D., MSN, R.N., CNE, COI
 — 
Written by 
James Roland
 — 
 Updated on April 13, 2023
Read this next
How Long Do Dreams Last?
Medically reviewed by 
Raj Dasgupta, MD
Dreams serve an elusive function in our brain. But one thing is for sure: We all dream if we sleep long enough, even if you don't remember.
READ MORE
Back Pain When Breathing: 11 Possible Causes
Medically reviewed by 
Deborah Weatherspoon, Ph.D., MSN
There are many potential causes of back pain when breathing. The pain may be caused by an injury to either the bones or muscles in your back. Or the…
READ MORE
Why Some People Always Remember Their Dreams and Others Forget
Medically reviewed by 
Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyD
And what those vivid dreams could mean about your sleep. 
READ MORE
Can Tart Cherry Juice Help You Sleep?
Tart cherry juice may help increase your body’s melatonin levels, resulting in better quality sleep. Learn what the research has discovered.
READ MORE
1 Hour of Screen Time at Bedtime Reduces Sleep by 24 Minutes, Study Finds
A new Norwegian study finds that one hour of screen time at bedtime results in a 59% higher risk of insomnia and 24 fewer minutes of sleep. The…
READ MORE
We Tried It: My 5-Night Experiment With Mouth Taping
I tried mouth taping for 5 nights. It didn't work for me at night, but I had a better experience during the day. Read more about my thoughts and if it…
READ MORE
What Types of Sleep Disorders Do People with Lupus Experience?
Medically reviewed by 
Alana Biggers, M.D., MPH
People with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) may experience problems with sleep. Learn what can cause sleep disturbances in lupus and how to improve…
READ MORE
Are Sleep Disorders Common in Adolescence?
Here's what you need to know about the most common sleep challenges teens experience, signs and symptoms, causes, and how to manage.
READ MORE
Why Do I Keep Falling Asleep When I Sit Down?
Several lifestyle and medical conditions like narcolepsy, sleep apnea, and depression may cause you to fall asleep when you sit down. Learn more. 
READ MORE
Could Sleepwalking Be a Symptom of a Mental Health Condition?
Medically reviewed by 
Tiffany Taft, PsyD
Sleepwalking often occurs on its own, but in some cases, it could be a sign of an underlying condition. 
READ MORE
© 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. 
See additional information
.
About Us
Contact Us
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Privacy Settings
Advertising Policy
Health Topics
Sitemap
Medical Affairs
Content Integrity
Newsletters
Your Privacy Choices
© 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. 
See additional information
.
© 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. 
See additional information
.
About
Careers
Advertise with us
OUR BRANDS
Healthline
Medical News Today
Greatist
Psych Central
Bezzy






