Title: Why do we dream, and what are dreams, anyway? We asked scientists | WIRED
Content:
Why do we dream, and what are dreams, anyway? We asked scientists | WIRED
Skip to main content
Open Navigation Menu
Menu
The science of dreams: what are they and why do we do it?
Security
Politics
The Big Story
Business
Science
Culture
Ideas
Merch
Reviews
More
Chevron
Search
Search
Security
Politics
The Big Story
Business
Science
Culture
Ideas
Merch
Reviews
Podcasts
Video
Newsletters
Magazine
Travel
Steven Levy's Plaintext Column
WIRED Classics from the Archive
Events
WIRED Insider
WIRED Consulting
Coupons
Bonnie Christian
Science
Aug 3, 2017 9:08 AM
The science of dreams: what are they and why do we do it?
What are dreams and do they have any meaning? WIRED asks scientists for their take
Save this story
Save
Save this story
Save
All products featured on Wired are independently selected by our editors. However, we may receive compensation from retailers and/or from purchases of products through these links.
At the turn
 of the century, Sigmund Freud suggested 
dreams
 were a window into our unconscious minds, wishes that we held while we were awake and expressed while we were asleep. Since then, we've learned how to study dreams and even pinpoint when a sleeping person might be dreaming. But there are still unanswered questions about why we have them, what they symbolise, and how they can give insight into our lived realities.
WIRED
 asked psychotherapist David Billington, MA from The Dream Research Institute and co-author of 
The Neural Correlates of Dreaming
, Dr Francesca Siclari, what are dreams and what, if anything, do they mean?
What are dreams?
Dreams are a state of consciousness, an experience that you have when you are asleep, Dr Siclari told 
WIRED
. "When you dream something you have an experience that resembles in many ways a waking experience. You hear things, you see things, you have emotions, and the experience is real, its imaginary of course, but the experience is real."
Dreams can be identified in a person who is sleeping and in a rapid eye-movement (REM) stage of the sleep cycle. During sleep studies, dreams are indicated by high-frequency electrical activity in the brain. But, it has been shown that similar activity also occurs during non-REM sleep, something that is not well understood and what Siclari and her team hoped to find out more about. 
In their study
, they found that when dreaming was reported by volunteers in both REM and non-REM sleep, a decrease in low-frequency activity occurred in the posterior cortical region, an area at the back of the brain associated with spatial reasoning and attention. The neuroscientists say they were able to correctly predict whether a volunteer was dreaming 92 per cent of the time by monitoring activity in this zone.
Subscribe to WIRED
Why do we dream?
Writing in 
The Interpretation of Dreams
, Sigmund Freud suggests dreams are just wishes that we have formed in our waking lives. While this has been widely criticised as reductionist, decades later, the why behind dreaming is still up for debate.
Billington told 
WIRED
 that strictly speaking dreams may not have a function and instead be a byproduct of other brain functions, "such as the 'cleansing' of neurons during sleep."
But, there are other hypotheses - like Antti Revonsuo's theory that explores whether dreams are a function to practice survival scenarios while sleeping. "The body gets the rest it needs and we can live out simulations without putting the body in danger," he said.
More ancient views of dreams suggest they come from 'elsewhere' or the dreamer goes 'elsewhere.' In modern times, the 'elsewhere' can be described as the unconscious mind, which has been seen to have an impact on the conscious self. "This might simply mean gaining insight into current problems (for example, August Kekulé’s 
ouroboros dream
, which helped him model the benzene atom), to having dreams that help someone overcome a past experience (e.g. the dream of a dead relative that provides relief), to something that helps a person make a decision about future direction," Billington said.
While in cultures all around the world views on why we dream and how we can use dreams to our benefit differ, Billington said they are almost universally seen as "giving hints about the body, soul and the world around us". He said there are positive correlations between indicators of well-being and vivid dreams. For example, being well means you dream more and more intensely. Working with dreams in psychotherapy also seems to have positive effects on mental well-being, he said.
Why can we remember some dreams and not others?
Sometimes people remember their dreams in vivid details, sometimes there is a feeling that you have had a dream but can't remember what it was, and other times you can't remember if you have had a dream at all. Siclari said this is an area her recent research touched on. "We found that in order to remember the dream, another area of the brain needs to be active - so if it's not active you don't remember it," she said.
Although, generally speaking, she said it is likely a good thing that we don't remember all our dreams. "If we remembered all our dreams as if it was waking experience then we would start getting confused between what is dreaming and what is reality."
Do dreams mean anything?
Billington said dream meanings are subjective because meaning is subjective. "If your dreams mean something to you, that means something. Content analysis approaches are looking at the common themes, which may also reveal common or universal meanings, but we’re not there yet." In a study by 
Nielsen and Powell in 2015
, it was found people perceived there to be a causation between eating specific foods and bizarre or disturbing dreams, but there were other factors that influenced this kind of dreaming. "This included sleep quality, emotional stress, and poor mental well-being. In fact, indicators of wellness like good sleep quality, healthy diet and longer fasting between meals were associated with vivid dreams," Billington said.
Siclari and Billington both said that research of dreams and what they can reveal about non-sensory consciousness is significant for how we view reality in wakefulness. "The more we learn about what consciousness is in the (apparent) non-sensory reality of dreams," Billington said, "the more we learn about the reality we live in".
This article was originally published by WIRED UK
Topics
Neuroscience
science
Read More
The Agonizing Task of Turning Europe’s Power Back On
A massive blackout affecting Spain, Portugal, and parts of France has been blamed on atmospheric conditions. Now engineers face the arduous task of getting the power back on.
Natasha Bernal
We Tested (and Sniffed) the Best Flower Delivery Services for Every Occasion
Celebrating Mother’s Day? An anniversary? Forgot your mother-in-law’s birthday? Let a professional flower delivery service do the heavy lifting for you. Just don’t forget the card.
Boutayna Chokrane 
Which Instax Camera Should You Buy?
Should you buy an Instax Mini or Mini Evo? Instax Square or Wide? We demystify Fujifilm’s Instax lineup to help you find the perfect instant camera (or printer).
Scott Gilbertson
Poop Drones Are Keeping Sewers Running So Humans Don't Have to
Poorly maintained sewers can have disastrous consequences, but regular inspections can be time-consuming, expensive, and dangerous. The solution: subterranean dung drones.
Sam Kieldsen
Car Subscription Features Raise Your Risk of Government Surveillance, Police Records Show
Records reviewed by WIRED show law enforcement agencies are eager to take advantage of the data trails generated by a flood of new internet-connected vehicle features.
Dell Cameron
Donald Trump Is Already Ruining Christmas
Santa’s helpers are freaking out that steep tariffs on Chinese imports will prevent toys, trees, and decorations from arriving in the US on time for the December holiday.
Zeyi Yang
Scientists Believe They’ve Witnessed ‘Planetary Suicide’ for the First Time
New data from the James Webb Space Telescope suggests a planet in a faraway solar system was consumed by a star by hurling itself into it.
Jorge Garay
How to Watch the Eta Aquariids Meteor Shower
This meteor shower is underway and peaks on the night of May 5–6. Here’s everything you need to know to watch it and the other major showers that will appear in 2025.
Gretchen Rundorff
The Best Mesh Wi-Fi Routers
Forget about patchy internet connections and dead spots in the house. These WIRED-tested multiroom mesh systems will get you online in no time.
Simon Hill
The Best Electric Kettles to Get the Water Going
We made lots of coffee and tea to test these electric kettles—and boiled it down to these top picks.
Matthew Korfhage
A New Quantum Algorithm Speeds Up Solving a Huge Class of Problems
It’s been difficult to find important questions that quantum computers can answer faster than classical machines, but a new algorithm appears to do so for some critical optimization tasks.
Stephen Ornes
How To Use Gemini AI To Summarize YouTube Videos
Looking for the CliffsNotes of a lengthy YouTube video? This Gemini feature could be worth a try.
David Nield
WIRED is where tomorrow is realized. It is the essential source of information and ideas that make sense of a world in constant transformation. The WIRED conversation illuminates how technology is changing every aspect of our lives—from culture to business, science to design. The breakthroughs and innovations that we uncover lead to new ways of thinking, new connections, and new industries.
More From WIRED
Subscribe
Newsletters
FAQ
WIRED Staff
WIRED Education
Editorial Standards
Archive
RSS
Accessibility Help
Reviews and Guides
Reviews
Buying Guides
Mattresses
Electric Bikes
Soundbars
Streaming Guides
Wearables
TVs
Coupons
Gift Guides
Advertise
Contact Us
Manage Account
Jobs
Press Center
Condé Nast Store
User Agreement
Privacy Policy
Your California Privacy Rights
© 
2025
 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. 
WIRED
 may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
 
Ad Choices
Select international site
United States
LargeChevron
Italia
Japón
Czech Republic & Slovakia
Facebook
X
Pinterest
YouTube
Instagram
Tiktok
