Title: Why We Dream and the Role They Play
Content:
Why We Dream and the Role They Play
Locations
:
Abu Dhabi
|
Canada
|
Florida
|
London
|
Nevada
|
Ohio
|
Health Essentials
Health Library
Find a Doctor
Make an Appointment
News
Careers
Contact Us
Search
Advertisement
August 18, 2022
/
Living Healthy
/
Sleep
Why Do We Dream?
Experts are still trying to unravel this mystery
Who needs to stream the latest Hollywood flicks? When you sleep at night, your brain splices both strange and familiar scenarios together to create the weirdest midnight movies ever. In other words: dreams.
Advertisement
Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services.
 
Policy
But why do we have dreams — and what do they all mean? Experts don’t have a lot of concrete answers, but behavioral sleep medicine expert 
Michelle Drerup, PsyD, DBSM
, explains what we 
do
 know about what’s going on when you dream.
What causes dreams?
Why do people dream? It’s a question for the ages.
There’s a lot that experts 
don’t 
know about why people dream and where dreams come from.
However, the prevailing theory is that dreaming helps you consolidate and analyze memories (like skills and habits) and likely serves as a “rehearsal” for various situations and challenges that one faces during the daytime.
We also know much — but not all — of what’s going on physiologically during dreams. Most dreaming occurs during 
REM (rapid eye movement) sleep
, which we cycle through periodically during the night. Sleep studies show our brainwaves are almost as active during REM cycles as they are when we’re awake.
Experts 
believe
 the brainstem generates REM sleep and the forebrain generates dreams. In fact, if the brainstem is injured, patients dream but don’t go into REM sleep. And if the forebrain is injured, patients go into REM sleep but don’t dream.
At the same time, we have far more to learn about what’s going on psychologically when we dream. For example, 
one study
 suggests that dreams stem more from your imagination (the memories, abstract thoughts and wishes pumped up from deep within your brain) than from perception (the vivid sensory experiences you collect in your forebrain).
And experts have found that dreaming can accompany psychiatric conditions. We do know that people living with post-traumatic stress syndrome (PTSD) are more likely to have nightmares. These are manifestations of tension for people living with PTSD because they recur around their traumatic experiences.
Advertisement
Of course, people without PTSD also have nightmares, so more research is needed as to the source of these often-upsetting dreams.
Why are your dreams so strange?
This may have to do with neurotransmitters, or brain chemicals. During REM sleep, some are more pronounced while others are suppressed.
Acetylcholine (which maintains brain activation) is more prominent, as is dopamine (which some researchers link to hallucinations). Dopamine may help give dreams their surreal quality.
Meanwhile, REM sleep suppresses the neurotransmitters that usually keep us awake: histamine, serotonin and norepinephrine. Thus, we’re less conscious of our environment.
Some researchers suspect the thalamus (the gateway for sensory input) closes when we dream.
How long do dreams last?
We can’t answer this easily because we haven’t found a good way to study dreams in people. Memories of dreams fade quickly after you wake up, and it’s difficult to correlate brain scans with your reports of dreams.
The relationship between space and time also changes when you dream. Time may seem to last forever — or pass by very quickly.
Do we dream every night?
Most people do dream every night. However, you simply don’t remember your dreams unless you’re awakened during or just after them.
That can be frustrating, although Dr. Drerup says it can help to write down what the dream was as soon as you wake up.
Figuring out what a dream 
means
 is yet another mystery, however. In the 1950s, Dr. Sigmund Freud introduced 
dream interpretation
, but we’ve never been able to substantiate his claims. In fact, Dr. Drerup notes that dream interpretation is completely subjective.
So, ditch the books that promise to tell you what your snoozing visions mean, and look to your own waking life instead.
Advertisement
Learn more about our 
editorial process
.
Advertisement
Related Articles
March 12, 2025
/
Sleep
How Much Sleep Do I Really Need?
Most adults need seven to nine hours, while young children need around 10 to 14
February 12, 2025
/
Parenting
4 Signs Your Child Is Ready To Stop Napping
Preschoolers who wake up early or have trouble falling asleep may not need their afternoon nap
February 11, 2025
/
Sleep
Is Snoozing Your Alarm OK?
New research may shed some light on the debated topic
January 30, 2025
/
Sleep
Full Proof: Explaining How Alcohol Can Interfere With Sleep
A late-night cocktail can disrupt your sleep cycle in a way that undermines the quality of your rest
January 17, 2025
/
Sleep
How To Fix Your Sleep Schedule
A regular sleep schedule is essential to your well-being — be consistent and take time to wind down
January 7, 2025
/
Sleep
What’s the Best Sleep Position for You?
There’s no one sleep position that’s best for everyone — but you may benefit from sleeping a certain way depending on your individual needs
December 24, 2024
/
Sleep
Does Magnesium Help You Sleep Better?
Research is limited on whether the supplement can help you snooze, and there may be better options  
October 31, 2024
/
Sleep
The Military Sleep Method: Does It Work?
The military sleep method promises to get you snoozing in two minutes — the techniques are sound but outcomes may vary
Trending Topics
Sleep
Breathing Problems? Try These Sleep Positions
If you’re feeling short of breath, sleep can be tough — propping yourself up or sleeping on your side may help
Mental Health
What Is Anxious Attachment Style — and Do You Have It?
If you fear the unknown or find yourself needing reassurance often, you may identify with this attachment style
Nutrition
Are Prebiotic Sodas Good for You?
If you’re looking to boost your gut health, it’s better to get fiber from whole foods
Health Categories to Explore
Brain & Nervous System
Children's Health
Exercise & Fitness
Heart Health
Men's Health
Mental Health
Nutrition
Orthopaedics
Primary Care
Skin Care & Beauty
Wellness
Women's Health
Other Popular Categories
Aging Well
Allergies
Cancer Care & Prevention
Chronic Pain
Cold, Flu & Respiratory Illnesses
Diabetes & Endocrinology
Digestive
Ear, Nose & Throat
Eye Care
Infectious Disease
Lung
Oral Health
Parenting
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Recipes
Rheumatology & Immunology
Senior Health
Sex & Relationships
Sleep
Urinary & Kidney Health
Weight Loss
Ad
Rendered: 
Tue Apr 22 2025 18:20:13 GMT+0000 (Coordinated Universal Time)
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
LinkedIn
Pinterest
Snapchat
Cleveland Clinic
Home
About Cleveland Clinic
Careers at Cleveland Clinic
Giving
Community Outreach
Research & Innovations
Health Library
Free Health eNewsletters
Resources for Medical Professionals
Media Relations
Site Information & Policies
Send Us Feedback
About this Website
Advertising Policy
Social Media Policy
Copyright, Reprints & Licensing
Website Terms of Use
Website Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Non-Discrimination Notice
Resources
Mobile Apps
Podcasts
9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44195
 | 
800.223.2273
 | © 
2025
 Cleveland Clinic. All Rights Reserved.
